SEM4
angażować (i) coś, obejmować coś - involve sth
Awans - promotion
BHP - health and safety
Biurokracja - bureaucracy
budować zaufanie - build trust
dogadywać się dobrze z kimś (phrasal verb) - get on well with sb
dołączyć do firmy - join a company
dyrygować orkiestrą - conduct an orchestra
elastyczny - flexible
Fakturowanie - invoicing
Hierarchia - hierarchy
Innowacyjny - innovative
kierownik (h) marketing - head of marketing
kojarzyć, wiązać (a) - associate
kolega z pracy - colleague
kontrola jakości - quality control
kreatywny - creative
łańcuch dostaw - supply chain
mieć coś wspólnego - have something in common
mieć wpływ (i ) na coś - have impact on sth
natknąć się na problem (phrasal verb) - run into a problem
na lotnisku - at the airport
nieformalny, nieoficialny - informal
niegrzeczny, nieuprzejmy (r ) - rude
nieuprzejmy (i ) - impolite
obowiązki (r ) - responsibilities
opiekować się czymś (l,a) - look after sth
opóźnienie - delay
oświetlenie - lighting
pilny - urgent
płatność - payment
podlegać komuś - report to sb
podobne zainteresowania - similar interests
podobny do - similar to
pracować blisko z - work closely with
pracować na pełen etat - work full time
pracownik szczebla kierowniczego - senior executive
priorytet - priority
prowadzić (l ) zespół - lead a team
próbka - sample
przełożony, kierownik (s) - supervisor
przewidywalny - predictable
przyciągać (a) klientów - attract customers
rekrutacja - recruitment
sceptyczny - sceptical
skupić się na zadaniu - focus on task
skupiony na pracy - work-focused
skuteczny, efektywny - effective
stanowisko, tytuł służbowy (2 words) - job title
stresujący - stressful
upewnić się – make sure
utrzymywać klientów - retain customers
ważność - importance
wydajny (e ) - efficient
wydział - department
wypuszczenie produktu na rynek - product launch
wytwarzanie (m) - manufacturing
wziąć się do pracy (phrasal verb) - get down to work
zadanie (t) – task
zajmować się czymś (t,c) - take care of sth
zarządzać czymś, dowodzić  - be in charge of sth
zapewniać (e ) coś - ensure sth
zasoby ludzkie - human resources
zawierać coś - include sth
zbierać (g) - gather
zcentralizowany - centralised
zdecentralizowany - decentralised
zrobić relację - cover a story
z siedziba w Londynie - based in London
All the tasks are now done by four teams.
Are we going to arrive in time to catch the train?
Are you free for lunch today?
Bob started his company in the 1960s.
I’d like to introduce you to Sam.
I’m actually based in Warsaw at the moment.
I’m in charge of the research and development team.
I’m responsible for coordinating the production team.
I’m sure I can do work under pressure.
I’m the Head of Sales.
I coordinate with all departments to ensure customer satisfaction.
I look after the company website – it’s my responsibility.
I report to the IT Director.
I take care of the export documentation.
I work closely with the Head of Marketing.
Nice to finally meet you in person.
Senior executives are elected by the employees.
Sorry, there was a bit of delay on the underground today.
Sorry to be in a rush like this.
Sorry to rush off so soon.
What questions do you usually ask when you meet someone for the first time?
When you meet a new person, talk to them to find something in common.
flexible – able to change quickly according to a situation (f)
polite – (adj.) behaving in a way that is socially correct (p)
innovative – (adj.) using new methods and ideas (i)
promotion – a move to a more important job in a company (p)
small talk – conversation about things that are not important (s,t)
priority – something that is very important, more important than other things (p)
newsgathering - the activity of researching news items for broadcast (n)
recruitment – the process of finding people to work for a company (r)
hierarchy – the system in which people are arranged depending on their importance (h)
glamorous – very attractive and exciting (g)
ADVANTAGE: There are some good sides of it, but there are also some disadvantages.
APPOINT: I can’t make it tomorrow as I have a dentist’s appointment in the afternoon.
ARRANGE: Should we make some arrangements for Mr Adler’s visit next month?
BUREAUCRAT: Bureaucracy is a complicated official system that has a lot of rules and processes.
CENTRE: We decentralized our operations last year and now we have many regional offices instead of only one.
DEVELOP: There is a big Research and development Department in our company.
EFFECT: The pharmacist said that it was an extremally effective cure for my headache.
EFFICIENCY: We need someone really efficient who can organise the office.
FAR: Further to our conversation, I confirm that we resent your order.
IMMEDIATE: The purpose of the meeting wasn’t immediately obvious.
IMPORTANT: In a hierarchical structure people are divided into levels of importance.
INCLUDE: Our work involves a variety of strategies to promote the business, including events and social media.
INNOVATION: Organisations with tall structures can change and innovate fast.
INNOVATION: We work hard to make our firm as creative and innovative as possible.
PAY: It’s important to make sure the payment come in on time.
PROMOTE: Did Steve get the promotion he wanted?
RECRUIT: He takes care of recruitment in the company.
RUN: Mr Smith is responsible for running the human resources team.
STRESS: I was afraid that working for a new company would be much more stressful.
SUPERVISE: Mr Jones was my supervisor when I worked for SY Company.
ankieta, badanie - survey
Biżuteria - jewellery
być pewnym siebie - be confident
cel (o ) - objective
dalej od domu - further afield
iść/podążąć za pieniędzmi - follow the money
karać - punish
kierować do klientów - target customers
lojalność - loyalty
lokowanie produktu - product placement
luksus - luxury
marka, metka - label
miejsce na wakacje - holiday destination
miłe (ciepłe) powitanie - warm welcome
nagle, z dnia na dzień (o) - overnight
nagłaśniać, reklamować (p) - publicise
na wielka skalę - large-scale
niezwykłe posunięcie - unusual move
nie śpieszyć się - take your time
oblać test na prawo jazdy - fail a driving test
ogłosić - announce
ostrożne podejście(c,a) - cautious approach
o obniżonej wartości - devalued
podkreślić (wyróżnić) (h) ważne informacje - highlight important information
podstawowa działalność - core business
pojawić się, wyłonić (e ) - emerge
Pokolenie - generation
Potwierdzić - confirm
potwierdzić uczestnictwo - confirm attendace
przekąski i napoje - refreshments
przeprosić za coś - apologise for sth
Przerywać - interrupt
przyśpieszać sprawy (r,t) - rush things
rozciągnięcie marki - brand stretching
rozpocząć (l) kampanię - launch a campaign
Rozpoznawalny - recognisable
rozszerzenie, ekspansja - expansion
równomierny process - steady process
rynek docelowy - target market
Rzemiosło - craftmanship
siła robocza - workforce
siła (s) - strength
społeczność chińska - Chinese community
sprzedaż detaliczna - retail sale
stały, spójny - consistent
szybki wzrost - fast growth
Świadomość – awareness
to zabiera czas - it takes time
turystyka wyjazdowa - outbound tourism
zapędzić się (v) (gdzieś) - venture into
wstęp (w jakieś miejsce) - admittance
wziąć czas wolny (w pracy) - take time off
wzrost (g) - growth
zaangażowanie klienta - customer engagement
Zachęcać - encourage
Zapach - fragrance
zapowiedź wystawy preview of the exhibition
zaprosić do zadawania pytań - invite questions
zaspokoić popyt - meet demand
zorganizować wydarzenie - hold an event
Are you working on a project now?
At the beginning of your presentation you should tell how long you will talk for.
Begin your presentation with a warm welcome.
Don’t worry about making mistakes.
Do you know which country is this brand from?
I’d like to invite you to an exhibition at the National Gallery.
If you make a presentation, you can start it with a personal story.
I’m looking forward to seeing you soon!
I haven’t taken any time off work in the last six months.
Logo is a recognisable official sign on a product.
Many thanks for the invitation.
What advice would you give him about how to support the team better?
What kind of products do you associate with luxury brands?
When you prepare you should decide which technique to use at the beginning.
Why don’t you focus on one project only?
Would you spend a lot of money on a luxury car?
You should apologise for your mistake.
In addition to movies, the company also publishes books.
As I said earlier, it’s a very important part of our activities.
At the end of the presentation ask the audience if there are any questions.
soft drink – a cold, usually sweet drink, that does not contain alcohol (s,d)
workforce – a group of people that work in a company or industry (w)
ambassador – a person that represents, speaks for, or advertises a particular organisation, activity or brand (a)
brand stretching – a process of using an existing brand name for products or services that may not seem related (b,s)
brand – a type of product made by a particular company (b)
approach – a way of considering or doing something (a)
awareness – knowledge that something exists (a)
jewellery – objects such as rings and necklaces that people wear as a decoration (j)
luxury – something expensive that is pleasant to have but not necessary (l)
core – the most important central part of something (c)
ABLE: I’m afraid that I will be unable to attend. 
ADMIT: Please remember to bring the invitation with you to gain admittance to the venue.
ATTEND: Please confirm your attendance by Friday 11th.
AWARE: Producers see the Internet as a place to promote brand awareness.
CHINA: Do you like chinese food?
CHOOSE: What choice did I have? None.
CONFIDENCE: Try to be confident of your skills and people will listen to you.
DELIGHT: I am absolutely delighted that you can come.
DESTINY: Popular world destinations for shopping include London, Paris and New York.
DO: Be careful not to overdo do it or you’ll get the opposite effect.
EXPAND: Last year we witnessed a rapid expansion of software industry.
FORTUNATE: Unfortunately, I have already made other arrangement, and I can’t meet you there tomorrow.
FRAGRANT: I could smell the delicate fragrance of roses.
GROW: The government is trying to limit the population growth.
JEWEL: He stole jewellery valued at $50,000.
PLACE: Can you name some brands that use product placement in TV programmes?
PROBLEM: How problematic is it to have people in a team who are very different to each other?
RECOGNISE: Some iconic designs are recognisable around the world.
USUAL: It was a very unusual move, they have never done it before.
WEALTH: Where do wealthy people go to do the shopping?
All the best.
Best wishes!
unfortunately, we have already made other arrangements.
Although Mr Smith is unable to attend. John Wilcox will be happy to take his place.
I would be delighted to accept your invitation.
I’d like to invite you to….
I’m Answer to invite you to…
I’m afraid I can’t make it.
I’m sorry but I won’t be able to come.
It would be great if you could come…
Kind regards 
Many thanks for the invitation.
Thanks for inviting me.
We are delighted to invite you to…
We look forward to seeing you.
BHP - health and safety
Biurokracja - bureaucracy
budować zaufanie - build trust
dogadywac się dobrze z kimś (phrasal verb) - get on well with sb
dołączyć do firmy - join a company
dyrygować orkiestrą - conduct an orchestra
elastyczny - flexible
Fakturowanie - invoicing
Hierarchia - hierarchy
Innowacyjny - innovative
kierownik (h) marketing - head of marketing
kojarzyć, wiązać (a) - associate
kolega z pracy - colleague
kontrola jakości - quality control
kreatywny - creative
łańcuch dostaw - supply chain
mieć coś wspólnego - have something in common
mieć wpływ (i ) na coś - have impact on sth
natknąć się na problem (phrasal verb) - run into a problem
na lotnisku - at the airport
nieformalny, nieoficialny - informal
niegrzeczny, nieuprzejmy (r ) - rude
nieuprzejmy (i ) - impolite
obowiązki (r ) - responsibilities
opiekować się czymś (l,a) - look after sth
opóźnienie - delay
oświetlenie - lighting
pilny - urgent
płatność - payment
podlegać komuś - report to sb
podobne zainteresowania - similar interests
podobny do - similar to
pracować blisko z - work closely with
pracować na pełen etat - work full time
pracownik szczebla kierowniczego - senior executive
priorytet - priority
prowadzić (l ) zespół - lead a team
próbka - sample
przełożony, kierownik (s) - supervisor
przewidywalny - predictable
przyciągać (a) klientów - attract customers
rekrutacja - recruitment
sceptyczny - sceptical
skupić się na zadaniu - focus on task
skupiony na pracy - work-focused
skuteczny, efektywny - effective
stanowisko, tytuł służbowy (2 words) - job title
stresujący - stressful
upewnić się – make sure
utrzymywać klientów - retain customers
ważność - importance
wydajny (e ) - efficient
wydział - department
wypuszczenie produktu na rynek - product launch
wytwarzanie (m) - manufacturing
wziąć się do pracy (phrasal verb) - get down to work
zadanie (t) – task
zajmować się czymś (t,c) - take care of sth
zarządzać czymś, dowodzić  - be in charge of sth
zapewniać (e ) coś - ensure sth
zasoby ludzkie - human resources
zawierać coś - include sth
zbierać (g) - gather
zcentralizowany - centralised
zdecentralizowany - decentralised
zrobić relację - cover a story
z siedziba w Londynie - based in London
finance
human resources
marketing
operations
production
sales
brand image
cash flow - przepływ gotówki
customer service
health and safety
invoicing - fakturowanie
manufacturing - produkcja
pricing - cennik
promotion - awans
quality control
recruitment- rekrutacja
supply chain - łańcuch dostaw
departments
stressful
glamorous
interesting
Director of Human Resources
Finance Supervisor - Nadzorca Finansowy
News Editor - Edytor wiadomości
Programme Director
News Reporter
involves
lead
make sure
running
report to
Head of Sales
work closely with
look  after
take care of
responsible for
in charge of
coordinate with(?)
actor
hotel manager
journalist
personal shopper
photographer
sports trainer
bureaucracy
centralised
decentralised
hierarchy
innovative
promotion
staff
CEO
sector
going to be - prediction
has - schedule event
are going to contribute - personal intention
i’m flying - plan
efficient - wydajny
flexible
work-focused
rude
informal
friendly
polite
quiet
open
professional
organised
effective
architecture
fashion
movies
music
toy makers
video games
bad history
base of clients
brands
cautions approach/ cautious approach- ostrożne podejście
core business - główna działalność
devalued
fast growth
further afield
stretching
ultra-luxury
venture into - zapędzać się
awareness - świadomość
brand stretching - rozciąganie marki
customer engagement - zaangażowanie klienta
image
interactive marketing - Marketing interaktywny
logo 
loyalty
product placement - lokowanie produktu
brand: ambassador, image, logo, loyalty, personality
accessories
cars
fashion
jewellery
fragrances
technology
character
employer
CV
jobseeker
internship - praktyka
cliche - oklepane
gain 
be of value to
apply for
sort out
come across well
stand out from
advertised
allow
asset - zaleta
confident 
considered
degree
enclosed - w załączeniu
exceeding - nadzwyczajny
experience -
grateful
vacany
vacancy - Luka w zatrudnieniu
application form - formularz zgłoszeniowy
consulting firm - firma konsultingowa
master’s degree - magister
career success
paid form
job applicant - kandydat do pracy
tie-up - wiązanie
undermined - podważone
upmarket - ekskluzywny
underestimated - niedoceniany
know-how
expose
currency fluctuations - wahania kursów walut
founded
revenue - przychód
preserve - utrzymywać
word of mouth - plotka
highlight  - atrakcja
rethink - przemyśleć ponownie
several factors - kilka czynników
diglithly driven - sumiennie prowadzony
outlet
resume
loan - pożyczka




MEET:
Everything has been prepared. We are meeting tonight.
The company is facing some problems. We are going to meet soon.
ASK:
Stop talking, John. I am asking you a question now.
Mary has already visited Oman. I am going to ask her for some tips about how to travel there.
MOVE:
Richard says he is going to move to Warsaw one day because he wants a better job.
I’ve bought a new flat in Warsaw. I am moving next week.
DO
What are you doing tonight? I’d like to talk to you later.
Andy has lost his keys. What is he going to do?
—--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
absolwent - graduate
długość stażu - length of the internship
docenić - appreciate
doprowadzasz mnie do do szału - you drive me crazy
doświadczenie w technologiach - experience in technologies
dotrzeć do sedna - get to the bottom
dowiedzieć się (phrasal verb) - find out
elastyczne godziny pracy - flexible working hours
jeżeli dotyczy - if relevant
klienci kluczowi - key clients
kompetencje twarde - hard skills
komunikatywny - communicative
kończyć z czymś (być skazanym na coś) - end up with sth
krajowy konkurs - national competition
list motywacyjny - covering letter
mieć/ zgłaszać obawy - have concerns
możliwości awansu - opportunities for promotion
niekompetentny - incompetent
niepewność - uncertainty
nieporozumienie, niezgoda - disagreement
nie załapałem tego, nie zrozumiałem - I didn't catch that
nowe wyzwanie - new challege
odezwę się, oddzwonię do ciebie -  I'll get back to you
odrzucić zaproszenie - refuse an invitation
organizować (h) rozmowy o pracę - hold job interviews
osoba, która potrafi pracować w zespole - team player
ostateczny termin - deadline
oszukiwać - cheat
pamiętny dzień - memorable day
podróżować służbowo - travel for work
poprosić o powtórzenie - ask for repetition
poprzedni pracodawca - previous employer
poszukiwania pracy - job search
poukładać, uporządkować (phrasal verb) - sort out
praca ochotnicza/ wolontariat - voluntary work
pracodawca - employer
przedsiębiorca - entrepreneur
przekraczać ustalone założenia - exceed performance targets set
rozmowa o pracę -  job interview
rywalizujący, konkurencyjny -  competitive
silne i mocne strony - strenghts and weaknesses
sprzedawca (1 word) - salesperson
starać się o staż - apply for an internship
szablon, frazes - cliche
tytuł zawodowy - degree
uaktualnić -  update
udokumentowane doświadczenie - proven track record
umiejętności przywódcze - leadership skills
uniwersalne zdolności -  transferable skills
wakat, wolna posada - vacancy
wartościowy - valuable
wielokrotnie, wiele razy -  over and over again
wymaganie, wymóg - requirement
wyróżniać się (phrasal verb) - stand out
zainteresowania -  interests
zarządząć (m) zespołem - manage a team
za pięć lat -  in five years' time
zdolny, sprawny (c ) - capable
zmotywowany - motivated
zwięzły - concise


 
According to the experts, it’s forbidden.
Always ask for repetition if you didn’t understand what somebody said.
Are you passionate about surfing or other water sports?
As a team member I was involved in decision-making.
Don’t lie about the things you can do or you’ll end up with responsibilities you don’t want.
Do you believe it can be of  value in your company?
Do you have a degree in business studies or sport education?
Go online and try to find out more about their past.
Graduates make the same mistakes over and over again.
Have you ever applied for  a job?
Have you ever had to deal with a problem or a difficult situation at work?
Have you ever received advice from  a careers coach?
If you graduate from this school, you can expect an exciting career in sales.
I’ll need to check it and I’ll get  back to you.
I don’t have much experience in  job seeking.
Jobseeker is someone who is looking for a job.
John missed his deadline on  his last project.
Please send you CV to our Head of Recruitment at hr@surf.com.
She disagreed with  her project manager.
What aren’t you good at ?
Why did you have concerns about the project?
At WSB University we also teach online.
 vacancy  – a job that is available for somebody to do (v)
reference – a letter written by somebody who knows you, giving information about your character and abilities, especially to a new employer ®
internship – a period of time during which a student or a new graduate gets practical experience in a job (i)
entrepreneur  – a point in time by which something must be done (d)
degree – a qualification given to a student after he or she has completed his or her studies (d)
previous – happening or existing before something else (p)
weakness -  lack of physical strength or a weak point in somebody’s character (w)
voluntary – (of work) done by people who choose to do it without being paid (v)
update  – to make something more modern or to give somebody the most recent information (u)


APPRECIATION - appreciate
CERTAIN - uncertainty
COMMUNICATION - communicative
COMPETENCE - incompetent
DESCRIBE - description
EMPLOY - employer
ENTREPRISE - entrepreneur
EXPRESS - expressions
FLEXIBILITY - flexible
INTERN - internship
LONG - length
MEMORY - memorable
MOTIVATION -motivated
PASSION - passionate
RECRUIT - recruitment
REFER - references
STRONG - strengths
SUCCESS - successful
TRANSFER - transferable
WEAK - weaknesses
additional / advertised / apply / at / bachelor / degree / enclose / experience / position / references / requested /
dodatkowe / ogłoszone / aplikować / na / licencjat / stopień / załączyć / doświadczenie / stanowisko / referencje / wnioskowane /
był uważany - was considered
członkowie zespołu - team members
fuzja - merger
gotowy posiłek - ready meal
identyfikator - ID badge
kasy samoobsługowe - self-service checkouts
kłócić się (a), argumentować - argue
kompetencje językowe - language competence
konkurencja, rywalizacja - competition
konkurujący, rywalizujący - competing
korzystny, opłacalny - profitable
kurs wymiany - exchange rate
marża - profit margin
myślę, że dam radę - I think I can manage
nabycie, zakup, przejęcie - acquisition
nabyć, zakupić - acquire
nie udać się - failure
obciąć koszty - cut costs
odnieść sukces - succeed
oferta przejęcia - takeover bid
ograniczony wybór produktów -  limited range of products
opóźniony - delayed
ostateczna decyzja - final decision
ostrzeżenie - warning
otyłość - obesity
podatek od osób prawnych/przedsiębiorstw - corporate tax
przegapić możliwość - miss an opportunity
podejmować ryzyka - take risks
polegać na czymś - rely on sth
polityka firmy - company policy
porażka - failure
poruszyć (r ) problem - raise a problem
prawo jazdy - driving licence
przedsiębiorstwo - enterprise
przejęcie - takeover
przemysł spożywczy - food industry
przetworzona żywność - processed food
rozwijać strategie - develop strategies
rynek wschodzący - emerging market
rywal (r ) - rival
ryzykowny - risky
rząd - government
sieć supermarketów - supermarket chain
sprawy zdrowia - health issues
stanąć przed problemem (stawić czoło…) - face a problem
stosować się do rad - follow advice
szkolenie zamknięte (w firmie) - in-company training
uczciwość - honesty
ważny gracz - major player
wyjaśnić, doprecyzować (c ) - clarify
wyjaśnić (m,c) - make clear
wymóg prawny - legal requirement
wymyślić plan (phrasal verb) - come up with a plan
wyniki, rezultaty (w pracy) (p) - performance
wysoka inflacja - high inflation
w niskich cenach - at low prices
zajmowac się (t) problemami - tackle problems
zwyczaje konsumenta - consumer habits
żądać, wymagać - demand
żywność ekologiczna -  organic food
Always show respect for the other person.
A new discount chain arrived in the market last year.
Before you decide, try to find out as much as possible about the condition of the company.
Last month we carried out a survey to learn more about the problems.
Staff number were cut in the stores after the self-service checkouts were introduced.
To pick up on what John said, why don’t we hire more people to help us?
Try not to rely too heavily on one person only.
Try to identify any significant risks to the business before you make any decisions.
What do you and your friends have in common?
What other places might be suitable for our next conference?
WHO warns about rising obesity.
Would you like to study at university or work?
You’ll always need to show your ID badge to get  into the building.
Younger consumers turn to smaller organic brands.
You need to clear your desktop at the end of each working day.
You need to come up with a new plan to overcome the problems.
As a result of pandemic, the way we are all working and learning has changed a lot.
In what ways is the present situation good or bad for business?
survey – an examination of opinions or behaviour made by asking people questions (s)
strategy – a plan or series or plans for achieving an aim, especially success in business (s)
chain – a set of related or connected things (for example supermarkets) (c)
failure – lack of success in doing or achieving something (f)
creativity – the ability to use or produce unusual ideas (c)
merger – the act of joining two or more businesses into one (m)
takeover – the act of taking control of the company by buying most of its shares (t)
profit margin – the difference between the cost of producing something and the price it is sold for
government – the group of people who are responsible for controlling a country (g)
checkout  – the place where you pay for the things that you are buying in a supermarket 
character
employer
CV
jobseeker
internship
cliche
gain
be of value to
apply for
sort out
come across well
stand out from
communication
communicative
responsible
responsibility
interns
positioning
position
flexible
flexibility
skillful
skills
passion 
passionate
recruitment
recruiter
interview
interviewer
describe
important
mean
rushed
say
advertised
allow
asset
confident
considered
degree
enclosed
exceeding
experience
grateful
vacancy
famous food brands
food prices
health issues
organic food
ready meals
supermarket chains
emerging
major
product
profit
takeover
bid
lines
margin
markets
player
develop
tackle
take
miss
opportunities
strategies
problems
risks
come up with
solve
costs
profit
acquire
develop
developing
competition
competing
expansion
expansive
expanded
failure
failing
grow
growing
innovate
merger
perform
profitable
risk
succeed
takeover


SEM5
UNIT 5
1. Word formation 
AGREE: I’m afraid, I disagree – my point of view is totally opposite.
ATTACHMENT: I have attached a new proposal for you attention.
COLLECT: The collection of household waste takes place every Wednesday.
COMMERCE: When he started work, he was offered training for operating commercial vehicles.
CONGESTION: It took him over an hour to get through the congested streets of west London.
CONVENIENT: I enjoy the convenience of living in the city center, so close to work.
CORRECT: Could you tell me how to spell this word correctly?
DELIVER: If you order now, allow 28 days for delivery.
DISTRIBUTE: The Channel Tunnel greatly improved the distribution of goods between the British Isles and the mainland Europe.
OPERATE: Will the suppliers be willing to adapt their operations?
PACK: He works as a meat packer in a local factory.
PRODUCER: Spain produces a lot of wine for export.
PROPER: You are not properly dressed for this kind of weather – you should put on a hat and a scarf.
RECOMMEND: Could you make recommendations for some over-the-counter medicines that I could buy?
SUPPLY: When XY went out of business, he had to look for new suppliers.
2. Learn the vocabulary 
aplikacja mobilna - mobile app
autostrada - motorway
bezpieczeństwo publiczne - public safety
dalekiego zasięgu, długodystansowy - long-haul
detalista internetowy - e-tailer
dokumenty przewozowe - shipping documents
e-biznes - e-commerce
faktura - invoice
filia - subsidiary
firma kurierska - courier company
kierownica - steering wheel
logistyk - logistician
logistyka - logistics
ładunek, przewóz, towar - freight
oczekiwać, spodziewać się - anticipate
odebrać - collect
odebrać - pick up
paczka - parcel
paczka - package
paczkomat - collection locker
pakowacz - packer
placówka pocztowa - postal service
pojazd użytkowy - commercial vehicle
proces pakowania - packaging process
przychód - revenue
ręcznie, manualnie - by hand
robotyka - robotics
rozładować - unload
rozwiązać problemy - resolve problems
samochód autonomiczny - self-driving car
sąsiednie kraje - neighbouring countries
sektor motoryzacyjny - automotive sector
udogodnienie, dogodność - convenience
wykonalny - feasible
wyposażony w - equipped with
wyprzedzający coś - ahead of
wysłać, nadać - dispatch
wzajemna satysfakcja - mutual satisfaction
za pół godziny - in half an hour
zakazane - banned
zaopatrzenie medyczne - medical supplies
zatłoczony - congested
zatłoczony - crowded
zator, korek - congestion
3. Prepositions 
To start, I’d like to hear your thoughts, before I decide what to do.
In the future many products might be delivered by drones.
Did you apologize to her for what you did last week?
Do you prefer buying online instead of visiting shopping centers?: 
How often do you send postcards? Who do you send them to?
I am really looking forward to my holidays in France.
I don’t agree at all with what you are saying!
It is still done by hand to maintain the quality of products.
My boss takes a great interest in everything his employees do.
My parcels will be delivered by a courier company.
The truck was loaded with so many goods that it couldn’t go up an icy road.
This company is pretty big compared to ours.
We tried different approaches to the problem, but nothing worked.
We were hoping for an immediate success, so we were really disappointed when it didn’t work out.
You have to keep the food at the correct temperature or it will go off.
You need to confirm that in an email to me so that I have it in writing.
Young people often worry about working conditions.
4. Definitions 
collection locker – a kind of self-service kiosk where you can collect your parcels and packages 
dishwasher – a machine for washing and drying plates, glasses and cutlery
distribution – a process of delivering things to different people (d)
congestion – a situation where there is too much traffic and driving is difficult (c)
drone – a small aircraft without a pilot controlled by someone on the ground
safety– a state when you are not in danger or at risk
transportation – (Am.Eng) a system of taking people or goods from one place to another
logistics – careful organisation of a complicated activity or a commercial activity of transporting goods to customers
long-haul – over long distances
steering wheel – this is what a driver holds when she or he is driving (2 words)
5. Passive
A friend of mine saw Mrs Green in London last week. Mrs Green was seen in London last week by a friend of mine.
Does Prof. Jackson teach the course? Is the course {=taught} by Prof. Jackson?
His girlfriend forgave him. He was forgiven by his girlfriend.
How do you spell this word? How is  this word {=spelt=spelled}?
I didn't write that note. Jim wrote it. That note wasn't written by me. It {=was written} by Jim.
I don't pay bills. Bills aren't paid by me.
Mary shut the door.The door was shut.
My sister cleans the kitchen every day. The kitchen  is cleaned every day.
People grow corn in Iowa. Corn is grown in Iowa.
People spend money. Money is spent.
Shakespeare wrote that play. That play was written by Shakespeare.
She answers all my questions. All my questions are answered by her.
She feeds her animals every day. Her animals are fed every day.
Someone stole my purse. My purse was stolen.
They ate lunch. Lunch was eaten.
They sell cold drinks here. Cold drinks  are sold here.
We keep these animals in cages. These animals are kept in cages.
6. Test the vocabulary
samochód autonomiczny (s, c) - self-driving car
odebrać (np. przesyłkę) - collect
przychód - revenue
udogodnienie, dogodność - convenience
sąsiednie kraje - neighbouring countries
odebrać (np. przesyłkę) (phrasal verb) - pick up
zator, korek - congestion
wysłać, nadać (d) - dispatch
zakazane (b) - banned
firma kurierska (c,c) - courier company
detalista internetowy - e-tailer
paczka (6 letters) - parcel
dokumenty przewozowe - shipping documents
faktura - invoice
rozwiązać problemy (r, p) - resolve problems


UNIT 6
1. Learn the vocabulary
bezpośredni - direct
hojny - generous
kapliczka, sanktuarium (s) - shrine
kolega ze studiów - fellow student
kulturalne nieporozumienie - cultural misunderstanding
mail z przeprosinami (a,m) - apologetic mail
natknąć się (phrasal verb) -  come across
niegrzeczny, nieuprzejmy - rude
nieznajomy (c,s) - complete stranger
niuans, subtelny szczegół -  nuance
oficjalny (f) - formal
osiągnąć zgodę, wypracować konsensus - have consensus
pełen szacunku, poważania - respectful
podróżować dla przyjemności - travel for pleasure
polityka (dziedzina) - politics
popularny, powszechnie stosowany (w,u) - widely used
protokół, etykieta, normy postępowania (e) - etiquette
przełamać lody (przy spotkaniu) - break the ice
przesłuchanie - interrogation
przy władzy -  in authority
różnica czasu (t,d) - time difference
słodkie pieczywo, ciastko - pastry
spotkać przez przypadek - meet by chance
szok kulturowy - culture shock
to było niefortunne, to był nieszczęśliwy zbieg okoliczności - it was unfortunate
towarzyski, społeczny (s) - sociable
traktować w ten sam sposób - treat the same way
uczciwy - honest
uprzejmy (p) - polite
utrata twarzy - loss of face
wizytówka (b,c) - business card
wkurzający, denerwujący (a) - annoying
wyrozumiały (u) - understanding
zaangażowanie, poświęcenie  - commitment
zapisać się do klubu (j,c) - join a club
zdemotywować się, stracić motywację (g,d) - get demotivated
zmienić miejsce zamieszkania - relocate
zniechęcić (phrasal verb) - put off
zwracać uwagę (p,a) - pay attention
zwyczaje - customs
2. Prepositions
Alex can be really depended on, if you need help or advice, just call him.
How would you describe your attitude to work-life balance.
It is really difficult to get into Harvard Business School, so you need to study really hard.
She was working as a nurse in a local hospital when she started writing stories for children.
The company went out of business only six months after it was set .
The number of Staff increased from 200 to 350 in just three months.
The product was so popular that it sold out really quickly and they had to wait for two months for another delivery.
There is a high demand for cheaper cars nowadays.
They made a turnover off over 2 million dollars in the first year.
This product is top of the range, so if you can afford it, buy it!
What do you miss about being a kid?
When Mike was a kid, he looked up to his uncle John and wanted to become a firefighter like him.
When she won an award, she was the happiest person in the world.
When you make a presentation, you need to adapt its style to your audience?
You need to start recycling in order to reduce the costs of waste disposal.


3. Definitions
business angel – a person who invests money in a new project to help it get started (b,a)
high flyer – a person who is extreme in aims and ambitions
mine – a place underground with deep tunnels where people work to get coal
crowdfunding – a situation when a large number of people give money to fund a project
start-up – a small company that has recently been established by someone
pitch – a speech or act that tries to persuade someone to buy something
commission – a sum of money paid to a salesperson for every sale they make
profit – money that is earned in the business after paying the costs of producing and selling goods or services
founder – someone who starts an organisation or a business
target market – the group of people that a company wants to sell its products or services to
4. Word formation
ADVANTAGE: Although there were many benefits of exporting goods, unfortunately, there were also some disadvantages.
BUY: Have you ever considered buying an Apple phone.
CAMPAIGN: He is a well-known animal rights campaigner who fights for the well-being of wild animals.
CROWD: They raised money for the film through the crowdfunding.
DIFFICULT: He encountered many difficulties when he set up his first company.
ENTERPRISE: Like many successful entrepreneurs she graduated from MIT University.
ESTIMATE: The influence of social media should never be underestimated.
FINANCE: Where can a start-up look for financial backing?
FOUND: Do you know who was the founder of Microsoft company?
PRESTIGE: She was a prestigious literary award for her book.
PROJECT: At the meeting they talked about projected sales for the coming months.
SIGNIFY: Do you think that it’s significant that he hasn’t called me yet?
STRONG: People often try to influence others through the strength of their ideas and opinions.
SUCCESS: He became extremely successful at a very early age.
USE: Recycling is very important because paper and plastic can be reused.
5.  Reported speech
Could you call her? John asked if I could call  her.
Did we go to the shop? He asked  if they had gone to the shop.
Does she want holidays? He wanted to know if she wanted holidays.
Have you been there? My friend asked me if I had been there.
How can she help him? She asked how she could help him.
Is she watching TV? My mother wanted to know if she was watching TV.
She is doing her homework. He said she was doing her homework.
She wants that. She said she wanted that.
Tom is going to be a doctor. He said Tom was going to be a doctor.
We went to the shop.She said they had gone to the shop.
When did they arrive? He wanted to know when they had arrived.
Where is she waiting? She wanted to know where she was waiting.
Where were you yesterday? He asked me where I had been the day before.
Why does she live in London? He wanted to know why she lived in London.
Will you come? He wanted to know if I would come.
You can help him. He said I could help him.
You have given me the book. He said I  had given him the book.
Your mum will call you. She said my mum would call me.
6. Test the vocabulary
prezentacja mająca na celu zdobycie nowego klienta (p) - pitch
dochód netto, dochód do dyspozycji (d,i) - disposable income
rozpraszać, dekoncentrować (d) - distract
podkreślać, zaznaczać (np.markerem) (h) - highlight
okoliczności - circumstances
nieodpłatny (o pracy (v) - voluntary
raty (przy zakupie) - instalments
zaspokoić popyt - meet demand
rozłożyć koszt (s,c) - spread cost
prowizja - commission
nieoprocentowany, bezodsetkowy - interest-free
niepewny, niezdecydowany, wahający się (h) - hesitant
osiągać zysk - make a profit
widoczność, widzialność (v) - visibility
rezerwacja lotu - flight booking
wskazany, pożądany (d) - desirable
finansowanie społecznościowe - crowdfunding
rynek, segmet populacji (d) - demographic
prognoza, przewidywanie - forecast
nieunikniony (i) - inevitable
przedłużenie, prolongata, dodatkowy czas (e) - extension
młoda osoba odnosząca sukcesy w biznesie - high flyer
stan magazynowy (s,l) - stock level
anioł biznesu - business angel
wyszukiwarka (internetowa) - search engine
nie doceniać, zbyt nisko oszacować - underestimate
zaniepokojony (+preposition) - concerned about
prestiżowy - prestigious
przedsiębiorca (e) - entrepreneur
prognozowana, planowana sprzedaż (p (9letters), s) - projected sales
-------------------------------------------
cutlery - sztućce
headquarters - siedziba
go out of business - wypaść z biznesu
creativity - kreatywność
set
deadline
deal
withdraw - wycofać
reach
warehouse
strength
partnership
underestimated - niedoceniany
prestigious
entrepreneurial
reasonable
visibility
campaigners
investment
recommendation
dispatched = send
pitch = present
instalment - rata
commission - prowizja
annual revenue - przychód roczny
turnover - obrót
request
back a project=support
raise funds = collect money
UNIT 7
1. Learn the vocabulary 
bezpośredni (d) - direct
hojny - generous
kapliczka, sanktuarium (s) - shrine
kolega ze studiów - fellow student
kulturalne nieporozumienie - cultural misunderstanding
mail z przeprosinami (a,m) - apologetic mail
natknąć się (phrasal verb) - come across
niegrzeczny, nieuprzejmy ® -: rude
nieznajomy (c,s) - complete stranger
niuans, subtelny szczegół - nuance
oficjalny (f) - formal
osiągnąć zgodę, wypracować konsensus - have consensus
pełen szacunku, poważania ® - respectful
podróżować dla przyjemności - travel for pleasure
polityka (dziedzina) - politics
popularny, powszechnie stosowany (w,u) - widely used
protokół, etykieta, normy postępowania (e) - etiquette
przełamać lody (przy spotkaniu) - break the ice
przesłuchanie - interrogation
przy władzy - in authority
różnica czasu (t,d) - time difference
słodkie pieczywo, ciastko - pastry
spotkać przez przypadek - meet by chance
szok kulturowy - culture shock
to było niefortunne, to był nieszczęśliwy zbieg okoliczności - it was unfortunate
towarzyski, społeczny (s) - sociable
traktować w ten sam sposób - treat the same way
uczciwy - honest
uprzejmy (p) - polite
utrata twarzy - loss of face
wizytówka (b,c) - business card
wkurzający, denerwujący (a) - annoying
Question text
wyrozumiały (u) - understanding
zaangażowanie, poświęcenie © -  commitment
zapisać się do klubu (j,c) -  join a club
zdemotywować się, stracić motywację (g,d) -  get demotivated
zmienić miejsce zamieszkania ® -  relocate
zniechęcić (phrasal verb) - put off
zwracać uwagę (p,a) -  pay attention
zwyczaje © - customs
2. Prepositions
I don’t expect to speak with a native accent, but I’m working really hard on my French pronunciation.
I think we’ll stick to our current supplier, there’s no need to look for a new one.
I was very fluent inSpanish when I lived in Madrid, but I haven’t spoken Spanish since I moved back to Poland.
I’d rather we looked at all the options before we decide what to do.
If it were up to me, I’d choose the bigger car.
I’ll try to find out what they know – I’m sure they aren’t telling us everything!
I’m not keen on dogs, I am more of a cat person.
It’s always better to buy in bulk – you’ll get cheaper prices this way.
I’ve been working on this project for three weeks now, the deadline is next week but I hope to finish it by Friday.
My boss was insisting on meeting our partners face to face, as he finds it easier to discuss problems in person.
‘What are you looking for?’ ‘My car keys, I don’t remember where I put them’.
What is the most effective way for you to prepare for an exam.
When I arrived in London, I didn’t speak English fluently at first, but as I was working with local people, I improved quickly.
You should make a decision based on the information available, don’t try to guess what you don’t know.
3. Definitions
culture shock – a feeling of anxiety and confusion that some people might experience in a foreign country
accent – a way in which people in a particular area or country pronounce the words
commitment – a willingness to give your time and energy to an activity, job or something you believe in
honest – about a person who tells the truth
demotivated – feeling less interested and enthusiastic about your work (d)
consensus – general agreement in a group of people
decisive – if someone is like that, they show an ability to make quick decisions
annoying – if someone or something is like that, it makes you feel angry and impatient
fluent – if your speech is like that it means you easily, smoothly and clearly without mistakes
sociable – this kind of people are friendly and enjoy talking to other people (s)
4. Word formation
ACCOMMODATE: When we plan the holidays, I always book plane tickets and my friends look for accommodation.
Feedback
ANNOY: My brother’s behaviour was so annoying that I couldn’t stand it and we finally argued.
COMMUNICATE: People in Italy come across as very communicative when you first meet them even when you don’t know the language.
EMPLOY: Many employees working for international companies often experience culture shock.
FORMAL: The conversation was really informal, more of a chat than a real job interview.
FORTUNATELY: It was unfortunate that his parents couldn’t be there to see him performing.
HONEST: They admitted that there were some dishonest managers in the company who often crossed the line and were accused of breaking the law.
OFFENSIVE: I didn’t mean to offend her – I just said it without thinking.
ORGANISATION: He is a very organized and inefficient person – never there when you need him.
POLITE: The shop assistant was very impolite in the way he treated the older lady and you could tell that she felt offended.
QUALIFY: You need formal qualification if you want to apply for this job.
RECOMMEND: My recommendation would be to wait a bit longer and see how the trends change. in a few months.
RELIGION: There were many religious paintings on the walls of his house.
STRESS: John left his job because it had been too stressful.
UNDERSTAND: Mr Jones tried to explain that it had to be some kind of misunderstanding as he had never ordered the machines to be delivered to his office.
5. First conditional
Part 1:
1. What are you going to do before you are (be) 50 years old?
2. What won't you do until you  have (have) more money?
3. What will you do when you get (get) back home?
4. What are they two things you are going to do as soon as this lesson finishes (finish)?
5. What country will you live in if you don’t stay (not stay) in Poland?
Part 2:
1) If you read  (read) my letter, everything will become (become) obvious.
2) You will pass (pass) the exam if you prepare (prepare) for it properly.
3) I will not answer (not answer) the phone if you call  (call) after midnight.
4) If the water in the lake is  (be) warm we will be able  (be able) to swim.
5) If they do not stop (not stop) making noise, I will call (call) the police.
6) He will ruin  (ruin) his health unless he stops  (stop) smoking.
7) What will you answer (you answer) if the police ask (ask) you about Paul?
8) Father will get angry  (get angry) if he learns  (learn) about it.
9) He will be  (be) lucky if no onel sees  (see) him.
10) Where will we sleep  (we sleep) if there are not  (not be) any free rooms at the hotel?
6. Second conditional
Question 1
1) If I knew  the details, I would inform you about it.
2) He would look much better if he didn’t wear such a long coat.
3) If I were you, I would change the job.
4) If I wrote her about it, I think she would burst into tears.
5) Would you give me the keys to your flat if I had nowhere to go?
6) If you spoke a bit louder, we could hear you better.
7) We would go there more often if my husband felt like doing it.
8) You would not believe me if I told you who I met.
9) Our house would be worth much more if we lived in a better district.
10) Grandma would see better if she wore stronger glasses.
Question 2
They would be rather offended if I did not go to see them. (not/go)
If you took more exercise, you would feel better. (feel)
If I was offered the job, I think I would take it (take)
I'm sure Amy will lend you the money. I'd be very surprised if she refused (refuse)
If I sold my car, I would not get much money for it. (not/get)
A lot of people would be out of work if the factory closed down. (close)
What would happen if I pressed that red button? (press)
Liz gave me this ring. She would be very upset if I lost it. (be)
Mark and Carol are expecting us. They would be disappointed if we did not come. (not come)
Would Tim mind if I borrowed his bicycle without asking him? (borrow)
If somebody walked in here with a gun, I'd be very frightened. (walk)
I'm sure Sue would understand if you explained the situation to her. (understand)
Question 3
If I knew his number, I would phone him. (know)
I would not buy that coat if I was you. (not,buy/ be)
I would help you if I could, but I'm afraid I can't. (help)
We would need a car if we lived in the country. (live)
If we had a choice, we would live in the country. (live)
This soup isn't very good. It would taste better if it wasn't so salty. (taste)
I wouldn't mind living in England if the weather were better. (be)
If I were you, I would not wait (not, wait). I would go now. (go)
You're always tired. If you did not go to bed so late every night, you wouldn't be tired all the time. (not, go)
I think there are too many cars. If there weren’t so many cars (not,be), there would not be so much pollution. (not,be)


UNIT 8
1. Learn the vocabulary
altruistic - altruistyczny, pomagający innym (a)
give praise - chwalić (g,p)
feel intimidated - czuć się onieśmielonym
give clear instructions - dać jasne instrukcje
selfish - egoistyczny, samolubny (s)
empathy - empatia
stupidity - głupota, idiotyzm
no longer - już nie, ani chwili dłużej
 key decisions - kluczowe decyzje
criticism - krytyka
appoint - mianować, wyznaczyć na stanowisko
mindset - nastawienie, sposób myślenia (m)
fail - nie udać się, nie powieść, odnieść porażkę (f)
unethical - nieetyczne
announce - ogłosić (a)
feedback - opinia, informacja zwrotna (f)
frugal - oszczędny, skromny (f)
make an effort - podjąć wysiłek
raise your voice - podnieść głos
hands-on - praktyczny (expression)
run a business - prowadzić firmę (r,b)
interruption - przerywanie, przeszkadzanie (i)
leadership - przywództwo
acknowledge - przyznać, potwierdzić (a)
development - rozwój
strong will - silna wola
 make people safe - sprawić, że ludzie będą czuli się bezpiecznie
constant change - stała, ciągła zmiana (c,c)
set an example - stanowić przykład, być przykładem
ongoing - trwający, toczący się właśnie (o)
attend a meeting - uczestniczyć w spotkaniu
contestant - uczestnik konkursu, zawodnik (c...t)
trust each other - ufać sobie nawzajem
facilitate - ułatwiać, umożliwiać (f)
overturn a decision - unieważnić decyzję
importance - ważność (i)
interchangeable - wymienny, zamienny (i)
behaviour - zachowanie
reflection - zaduma, rozmyślanie, refleksja ®
delegate - zlecać komuś pracę do wykonia, kazać coś zrobić (d)
2. Prepositions
All meetings must start on time. Don’t be late or we’ll have to waste our time waiting for you.
Can you be a bit more specific about what has caused the problems?
Can you give me an example of a good working practice?
I felt intimidated by the challenge, but I tried to do it anyway.
I think you did a very good job of communicating with the people.
I’ll certainly bear that in mind next time I try to talk him out of something.
Is everyone OK with their tasks or do you need me to explain it to you again?
Mary had great empathy with people and that’s why everybody liked her.
Put those points  in order of importance, the most important at the top.
She coped with her personal problems successfully and many people didn’t even know she
experiences so many difficulties.
Thank you all for coming to this special meeting.
The workshop she wanted to attend was cancelled at the last minute.
We worked together for over a month but I was not happy with the way she treated other colleagues.
What do you mean by ‘not good enough’? Please tell me what exactly was wrong.
You shouldn’t criticise her for being late, the traffic is horrible these days.
3. Definitions
brain – an organ inside your head that controls your body
intimidated – if someone feels like that they feel frightened or lack confidence because of the people around them (i)
feedback – information you get on the work or progress that you have done, it might be positive or negative
unethical – morally wrong and unacceptable
contestant – someone who attempts to win in a competition, synonym to a competitor 
will – the determination to do something (w)
praise – the things that you say to express admiration and approval of something (p)
behaviour – the way in which somebody acts, especially towards other people
delegate – to give a particular job or task to someone so that they do it for you (d)
prioritise – to treat some things as more important than other things
4. Word-formation
AGREE: We had a disagreement over our responsibilities at work and it took us some time to work out our differences.
APPRECIATION: Thanks a lot, I really appreciate your feedback.
BEHAVE: Make sure that good behaviour is rewarded!
CHARACTER: What are the characteristics of a great leader?
COMPLETE: She was criticised for not completing the task on time.
CONTEST: The quiz show tonight features five contestants
DEVELOP: If opportunities for professional development are important to you, this company is a good place to work.
ENTERTAIN: He has worked in the entertainment industry all his life.
INTERRUPT: I worked all morning without the  interruption.
LEADER: All the employees praised her leadership skills during the crisis.
RELY: We have the reliable information that the taxes will increase soon.
RESPONSE: I asked her what the time was, but she didn’t respond.
SCIENCE: There were a few scientists who said that the results of the research were flawed.
SUCCESS: She has already successfully completed three courses.
TURN: When the new management took over, they  overturned the decisions to expand abroad.
—--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Decisions involving the future of the company were r _ _ c _ e _  at the meeting yesterday.
We are d _ _ _ g _ t _ d to announce that our company was awarded the first prize.
circumstances
objectives
merge
cross-cultural
developmental feedback
agenda
custom
action point
coaching
positive feedback
stereotype
survey
time management
mindset
princple/general
frugal  - oszczędny
caution - ostrożność
interchangeable - zamienny
1. appoint
2. work out
3. open up
4. take as given
5. reliable
6. extrapolate
7. successor
8. pursue
defining relative clauses - daje informacje (bez przecinka)
non-defining - dodatkowa informacja
zad.
1. who, that
2. whose 
3. which, that
4. when
5. which, that
6. who, that
7. which
8. who, that
zad.
1. who, that
2. which, that -o
3. which
4. who
5. who, that -o
6. where, that
7. when, that -o
8. whose
9. where
10. who
zad.
1. The workshop, which she planned to attend, was canceled at the last minute.
2. Leading a team, which l wouldn’t like to do it
3. The university, where I studied
4. Her book, which was published last year, instantly became a bestseller.
5. The restaurant, where we often go for lunch, has a good selection of desserts.
6. London, which is the capital city of the UK, is a very expensive city.
zad. 
I go to South Korea, where I have my relatives, every year.
My dog, which is three years old, likes to go on walks.
be put off
come across


------------------
UNIT 7

1. I would like to watch a light comedy. Is there a good film on Netflix you could !recommend to me?
2. Having lived in England for over 10 years, he is very !fluent in English.
3. Italians come !across as quite friendly and open when you first meet them.
4. There are many pluses, but unfortunately there are also some !disadvantages of working abroad.
5. I started to work there last month, my new !colleagues are friendly, helpful and funny.
6. He is the most !decisive person I know – he makes decisions quickly and never regrets what he does.
7. The !deadline for this project is the end of the week. If I don’t meet it, my boss will be furious.
8. My first !impression of her was not good, but when I got to know her better, we became friends.
9. It’s best to buy in !bulk- only if you buy a lot of it, you’ll get the reduction in price.
10. When you lived in Thailand, did you experience !culture shock ?

-------------------
UNIT 8

1. I respect my teacher because she always gives me constructive !feedback when I make mistakes.
2. You need to set your !priorities – you can’t do everything so you need to decide what is the most important.
3. I think I need more details – could you be more !specific about what really happened?
4. We are !delighted to announce that our company was awarded the first prize.
5. There were nine !contestants in the quiz show, but there could be only one winner.
6. Stop the !interruption and let him finish what he’s saying.
7. During the discussion you should limit the !length of speaking time, nobody should speak longer than five minutes.
8. Good leaders should know how to !delegate tasks.
9. My mother has great !empathy with people – she is understanding and always tries to help them.
10. Decisions involving the future of the company were (r _ _ c _ e _) !receive at the meeting yesterday.

-------------------
UNIT 7 & 8

1. All the children had eaten before their parents arrived to take them home.
2. Mary asked her teacher what he had said because she hadn't heard very well.
3. I was very happy to see my cousin, because I hadn't seen her for years.
4. When they arrived at the cinema, the film had begun.
5. When I came back home I saw that someone had broken the window.

1. John was watching a comedy on Netflix when the TV broke down.
2. Did they play the game at 8 o’clock yesterday?
3. I forgot to phone my sister on her birthday.
4. I was cleaning the garden while my husband was working in the garage.
5. Yesterday I saw my neighbour at the cinema, but I didn’t speak to him.
6. While Tom and Sally were driving home, they had an accident.